# Title: The era of brain observatories: opportunities and challenges for data-driven human neuroscience

# Abstract:

Neuroscience is at the cusp of a new era of Big Data: through large collaborative research projects, the field is gaining access to unprecedented amounts of information about the structure and function of the brain. These datasets are already having a profound impact on neuroscience and they promise to help us understand the biological underpinnings of human brain health.  At the same time, the deluge of data is generating new challenges, as researchers struggle to store, manage, analyze, and interpret the data. Scalable cloud computing methods can be used to lower some of these barriers, but the adoption of these methods is in its infancy. This presentation will focus on tools that we develop to smoothly transition neuroscience into cloud computing. In particular, Cloudknot (https://nrdg.github.io/cloudknot) is a software library that we developed that packages existing Python code for deployment at scale in AWS Batch. I will demonstrate the use of this software in our research that uses large-scale magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) datasets to understand the role of brain connections in cognition and behavior.

# Bio:

 Ariel Rokem is a Research Assistant Professor at the University of Washington Department of Psychology. He received a PhD in neuroscience from UC Berkeley (2010) and additional postdoctoral training in computational neuroimaging at Stanford (2011 – 2015). He was also a Senior Data Scientist at the University of Washington eScience Institute (2015-2020). He leads a research program in neuroinformatics: the development of data science tools, techniques and methods and their application to the analysis of neural data. One thrust of this research focuses specifically on the application of methods from statistical learning to analysis of diffusion MRI data acquired in human brain. Another thrust of the research focuses specifically on the development of systems for analysis (e.g., Mehta et al. 2017, Richford and Rokem, 2018) and sharing (e.g. Yeatman et al. 2018) of large-scale open datasets. He is a member of the Software and Data Carpentry communities, where he has been an instructor since 2013 and an instructor trainer since 2015. He also directs the annual Summer Institute for Neuroimaging and Data Science (https://neurohackademy.org). A contributor to multiple open-source software projects in the scientific Python ecosystem, he is a member of the editorial board of the Journal for Open Source Software (JOSS).
